New JS interop docs (#4578)
dart-lang/site-www: src/interop/js-interop/usage.md

---
title: Usage
description: How to declare and use JS interop members.
---

JS interop works by looking up properties in the [global JS scope]. In order to
interact with these properties, you use [`external`] interop members. In order
to provide types for these properties, you use interop types.

## Interop types

When interacting with a JS value, you need to provide a Dart type for it. In
order to do this, you either use or declare an interop type. Dart provides a set
of core interop types called ["JS types"] that you can use to add types to your
interop members. You can also declare an interop type using [extension types] by
making its representation type another interop type. "JS types" refer to the
interop types provided by Dart, and while all JS types are interop types, not

> all interop types are JS types. For example:

Reviewer: Consider a few simplifications for this paragraph:
- drop the last clarification that not all interop types are js types
- use a recursive definition (can help make the above simplification more obvious)
- split what interop types are used for to a separate paragraph. The reference above that they are used "to add types to interop members" can be confusing because we use the word "types" 3 times in that sentence.

All in all, a suggestion for this paragraph could be:
> Interop types let you provide a Dart type for interacting with a JS value. Interop types are either a core [JS type] provided by Dart, or an [extension type] wrapping an existing interop type.

Then later we can say how they are used, for example:

> Interop types allow you to provide an interface for how members of a JS values can be used. They are also used in the signature of other interop APIs to declare assumptions about inputs and outputs.

have a corresponding JS type like [`Window`].

Interop types should also generally implement their representation type so that
they can be subtypes of the representation type.

## Interop members

In order to get a JS value that you can provide a type for, you'll want to use
an `external` interop member. These members might take in arguments and return a
type. The types that can be used on these members have [restrictions]. There are
various ways you can declare interop members.

### Top-level interop members

```dart
@JS()
external Console get console;

@JS()
external set name(String value);

@JS()
external void close();
```

Here, `console`, `name`, and `close` are top-level interop members. When
`console` is called, the value in the `console` property in the global namespace
is retrieved and casted to `Console`. When `name` is set, the property `name` in
the global namespace is set to the given value. When `close` is called, the
function `close` in the global namespace is called with no arguments. You can
declare top-level interop getters, setters, methods, and fields, which are just
pairs of getters and setters.

### Interop type members

```dart

> extension type Array._(JSObject _) implements JSObject {

Reviewer: This example is really nicely explained, I am however wondering if it would be worth morphing it into an example that uses a JavaScript class, rather than a browser type, as the underlying JavaScript API.

The one downside of that is that I can imagine it may be too tricky to include the `operator []` as part of the example, but maybe that's OK?

My motivation is to make the connection between Dart-JS more direct by showing both the original JavaScript and the corresponding Dart interface.

  fields.

- Operators. There are only two `external` interop operators allowed in interop
  types: `[]` and `[]=`. These are instance members that match the semantics of
  JS' [property accessors]. In the above example, `array[i]` gets the value in
  the `i`th slot of `array`, and `array[i]` sets the value in that slot to
  `i.toJS`. We expose other JS operators through [utility functions] in
  `dart:js_interop`.

In the [JS types] section, you'll see that there exists a predefined JS type for
`Array` called `JSArray`. Here, we're writing another interop type for the same
JS type and just *viewing* it differently, so there is no conflict. If we
wanted, we could have made the representation type `JSArray`:

```dart
extension type Array._(JSArray<JSAny?> _) implements JSArray<JSAny?> {}
```

Lastly, like any other extension type, you're allowed to declare any
non-`external` members in the interop type. `isZeroLength` is one such example.

#### Object literal constructors

It is useful sometimes to create a JS [object literal] that simply contains a
a number of properties and their values. In order to do this, we allow you to

> use a constructor with only named arguments:

Reviewer: It may be helpful to provide a rationale for why this syntax. Unlike the other syntaxes we have, the reason a constructor with positional arguments means one thing, and with named arguments means another, it's still very subtle.

It may help to have a short section first about constructors in general, and explain the details there? We can then draw a parallel with JavaScript, highlighting that because functions in JavaScript only take positional arguments, we adopted in Dart that a constructor using only positional arguments is considered a reference to a constructor function.

  external Options({int a, int b});
  external int get a;
  external int get b;
}
```

A call to `Options(a: 0, b: 1)` will result in a JS invocation of
`{a: 0, b: 1}`. You can get or set these values through `external` instance
members.

### Extension members on interop types

You can also write `external` members in extensions of interop types. For
example:

```dart
extension on Array {
  external int push(JSAny? any);
}
```

The semantics of calling `push` are identical to what it would have been if it
was in the definition of `Array` instead. The only `external` members you can
write in such an extension are instance members and the allowed operators. Like
with interop types, you can write any non-`external` members in the extension.
These extensions are useful for when an interop type doesn't expose the
`external` member you need and you don't want to create a new interop type.

### Parameters

`external` interop methods can only contain positional and optional arguments.
The one exception is object literal constructors, where they can contain *only*
named arguments.

Unlike with non-`external` methods, optional arguments do not get replaced with

> their default value, but are instead omitted. For example:

Reviewer: if you want, we could mention why we do this.

```dart
external int push(JSAny? any, [JSAny? any2]);
```

Calling `array.push(0.toJS)` in Dart will result in a JS invocation of
`array.push(0.toJS)` and *not* `array.push(0.toJS, null)`. If you declare a
parameter with an explicit default value, you will get a warning that the value
will be ignored.

## `@JS()`

It is sometimes useful to refer to a JS property with a different name than the

> one written. For example, if you want to write two `external` APIs that point to

Reviewer: not sure if we want to highlight it, but other common uses for renaming is when the JS name is invalid or unsable in Dart (e.g. a name that starts with `_`, a name that matches a Dart keyword)

the same JS property, you’d need to write a different name for at least one of
them. In order to do this, you can use the [`@JS()`] annotation with a constant
string value. For example:

```dart
extension type Array._(JSArray<JSAny?> _) implements JSArray<JSAny?> {
  external int push(JSNumber number);
  @JS('push')
  external int pushString(JSString string);
}
```

Calling either `push` or `pushString` will result in JS code that uses `push`.

> You can also rename interop types:

Author: Is it the case that without `@JS()` you _must_ use the name of the native JS type you're writing an extension type over as the name of the extension type? It makes sense that you'd have to do this to interact with APIs since you're calling `external` on all of them, but I thought maybe the interop types could be named anything. Like, in [the `Array` example](https://github.com/dart-lang/site-www/pull/4578/files#diff-173da65856efe1cfdb286777d80c04a313dad6171f415b1403693da8f8a95e29R73) up above, does that extension type _need_ to be named `Array`?  

If that's the case, and if it's not extremely obvious enough already, maybe you could add that to a sentence after [line 92](https://github.com/dart-lang/site-www/pull/4578/files#diff-173da65856efe1cfdb286777d80c04a313dad6171f415b1403693da8f8a95e29R92):

```md
Here we are using Array to interop with JS’ [Array] type. 
The extension type must have the same name as the native JS type
(unless using the `@JS` annotation (link to this section)).
```

  external static int now();
}
```

Calling `JSDate()` will result in a JS invocation of `new Date()`. Similarly,
calling `JSDate.now()` will result in a JS invocation of `Date.now()`.

Furthermore, you can namespace an entire library, which will add a prefix to all
interop top-level members, interop types, and `static` interop members within
those types:

```dart
@JS('library1')
library;

import 'dart:js_interop';

@JS()
external void method();

extension type JSType(JSObject _) implements JSObject {
  external JSType();

  external static int get staticMember;
}
```

Calling `method()` will result in a JS invocation of `library1.method()`,
calling `JSType()` will result in a JS invocation of `new library1.JSType()`,
and calling `JSType.staticMember` will result in a JS invocation of
`library1.JSType.staticMember`.

Unlike interop members and interop types, we only ever add a library name in the
JS invocation if you provide a non-empty value in the `@JS()` annotation on the
library.

```dart
library interop_library;

import 'dart:js_interop';

@JS()
external void method();
```

Calling `method()` will result in a JS invocation of `method()` and *not*
`interop_library.method()`.

> You can also write multiple namespaces delimited by a '.' for libraries,

Author: If this looks worse, you can leave as is
```suggestion
You can also write multiple namespaces delimited by a `.` for libraries,
```

top-level members, and interop types:

```dart
@JS('library1.library2')
library;

import 'dart:js_interop';

@JS('library3.method')
external void method();

@JS('library3.JSType')
extension type JSType(JSObject _) implements JSObject {
  external JSType();
}
```

Calling `method()` will result in a JS invocation of
`library1.library2.library3.method()`, calling `JSType()` will result in a JS
invocation of `new library1.library2.library3.JSType()`, and so forth.

> You can't use `@JS()` annotations with '.' in the value on interop type members

Author: ```suggestion
You can't use `@JS()` annotations with `.` in the value on interop type members
```

or extension members of interop types, however.

> 

Author: Maybe you should either add a sub heading here or at least an anchor. Not that you _need_ to reference it earlier in the annotation section (even though I was wondering), but because the empty `@JS()` comes up way at the top of the page and maybe would be useful to link to:

```md
### Empty `@JS()`
```

Or
```md
<a id="empty-js"></a>
```

And then somewhere up in the [Top-level members section](https://github.com/dart-lang/site-www/pull/4578/files#diff-173da65856efe1cfdb286777d80c04a313dad6171f415b1403693da8f8a95e29R52), add a sentence saying "Top level members must be prepended with an [empty `@JS()` annotation]()" and that links to (#empty-js)

If there is no value provided to `@JS()` or the value is empty, no renaming will
occur.

`@JS()` also tells the compiler that a member or type is intended to be treated
as a JS interop member or type. It is required (with or without a value) for all
top-level members to distinguish them from other `external` top-level members,
but can often be elided on and within interop types and on extension members as
the compiler can tell from the representation type and on-type.

## `dart:js_interop` and `dart:js_interop_unsafe`

[`dart:js_interop`] contains all the necessary members you should need,
including `@JS`, JS types, conversion functions, and various utility functions.
Utility functions include:

- [`globalContext`], which represents the global namespace that the compilers
  use to generate JS invocations.

> - [Helpers to type-check JS values]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Helpers to inspect the type of JS values]
```

- JS operators

> - [`dartify`] and [`jsify`], which type-check and auto-convert certain JS values

Reviewer: similarly here - I associate type-check with the type-checking and runtime type checks model that we have the type system, but I believe here we are just converting JS values using JS type information to do a decent job at it.

  to Dart values and vice versa.

> and more. More utilities might be added to this library in the future.

Author: Seems weird to say "and more" without linking to anything, unless you think it's understood where they can go to find that info? Otherwise just remove it
```suggestion
More utilities might be added to this library in the future.
```

[`dart:js_interop_unsafe`] contains members that allow you to look up properties
dynamically. For example:

```dart
JSFunction f = console['log'];
```

Instead of declaring an interop member named `log`, we're instead using a string
to represent the property. `dart:js_interop_unsafe` provides functionality to
dynamically get, set, and call properties.

{{site.alert.warn}}
Avoid using `dart:js_interop_unsafe` if possible. It makes security compliance
more difficult to guarantee and may lead to violations.
{{site.alert.end}}

> 

Reviewer: It may be worth adding to this document also a section to read more about conversions.

In terms of usage, I think it will be good to highlight here that:
* you can use primitive or interop types at API signatures
* Callers may need to use conversions when passing values
* Some values always require an explicit conversion due to ensure correctness and consistency. This includes Lists and Functions.

{% comment %}
TODO: add links (with stable) when ready:
TODO: How do you link to a subsection of another section?
{% endcomment %}

[global JS scope]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Global_scope
[`external`]: https://dart.dev/language/keywords
["JS types"]: /interop/js-interop/js-types
[extension types]: /
[`Window`]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window
[restrictions]: /interop/js-interop/js-types.md#restrictions
[`Date`]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date
[property accessors]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Property_accessors#bracket_notation
[utility functions]: https://api.dart.dev/dev/dart-js_interop/JSAnyOperatorExtension.html
[JS types]: /interop/js-interop/js-types
[`JSArray`]: https://api.dart.dev/dev/dart-js_interop/JSArray-extension-type.html
[object literal]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Object_initializer

> [`@JS()`]: https://api.dart.dev/dev/dart-js_interop/JS-class.html
> [`dart:js_interop`]: https://api.dart.dev/dev/dart-js_interop
> [`globalContext`]: https://api.dart.dev/dev/dart-js_interop/globalContext.html
> [Helpers to type-check JS values]: https://api.dart.dev/dev/dart-js_interop/JSAnyUtilityExtension.html
> [`dartify`]: https://api.dart.dev/dev/dart-js_interop/JSAnyUtilityExtension/dartify.html
> [`jsify`]: https://api.dart.dev/dev/dart-js_interop/NullableObjectUtilExtension.html
> [`dart:js_interop_unsafe`]: https://api.dart.dev/dev/dart-js_interop_unsafe

Author: ```suggestion
[`@JS()`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-js_interop/JS-class.html
[`dart:js_interop`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-js_interop
[`globalContext`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-js_interop/globalContext.html
[Helpers to type-check JS values]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-js_interop/JSAnyUtilityExtension.html
[`dartify`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-js_interop/JSAnyUtilityExtension/dartify.html
[`jsify`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-js_interop/NullableObjectUtilExtension.html
[`dart:js_interop_unsafe`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-js_interop_unsafe
```

allow you to write a Dart type signature for any arguments and return value.
The types that can be used in the signature of these members have
[restrictions]. The JS API they correspond to is determined by a combination of
where they're declared, their name, what kind of Dart member they are, and any
[renames](#js).

### Top-level interop members

Given the following JS members:

```JS
globalThis.name = 'global';
globalThis.isNameEmpty = function() {
  return globalThis.name.length == 0;
}
```

You can write interop members for them like so:

```dart
@JS()
external String get name;

@JS()
external set name(String value);

@JS()
external bool isNameEmpty();
```

Here, there exists a property `name` and a function `isNameEmpty` that are
exposed in the global scope. To access them, you use top-level interop members.
To get and set `name`, you declare and use an interop getter and setter with the
same name. To use `isNameEmpty`, you declare and call an interop function with
the same name. You can declare top-level interop getters, setters, methods, and
fields, which is the same as a getter and setter pair.

Top-level interop members must be declared with a [`@JS()`](#js) annotation to

> distinguish them from other `external` top-level members.

Reviewer: nit: consider saying ", for example, from `dart:ffi`" -- I'm not sure if users may be aware what other external members there may be, so not sure if it's worth giving an example.

Reviewer 2: Done.

  the instance. For example:

  ```dart
    final time = Time(0, 0);
    print(time.isDinnerTime()); // false
    final dinnerTime = Time.dinnerTime;
    time.hours = dinnerTime.hours;
    time.minutes = dinnerTime.minutes;
    print(time.isDinnerTime()); // true
  ```

  The call to `dinnerTime.hours` gets the value of the `hours` property of
  `dinnerTime`. Similarly, the call to `time.minutes=` sets the value of the
  `minutes` property of time. The call to `time.isDinnerTime()` calls the
  function in the `isDinnerTime` property of `time` and returns the value.
  Like top-levels and `static` members, you can declare instance methods,
  getters, setters, and fields.

- **Operators**. There are only two `external` interop operators allowed in
  interop types: `[]` and `[]=`. These are instance members that match the
  semantics of JS' [property accessors]. For example, you can declare them like:

  ```dart
  extension type Array(JSArray<JSNumber> _) implements JSArray<JSNumber> {
    external JSNumber operator [](int index);
    external void operator []=(int index, JSNumber value);
  }
  ```

  Calling `array[i]` gets the value in the `i`th slot of `array`, and

>   `array[i]=` sets the value in that slot to `i.toJS`. Other JS operators are

Reviewer: Not sure we need the bit about `i.toJS` anymore.

```suggestion
  `array[i]=` sets the value in that slot. Other JS operators are
```

Reviewer 2: Ah, this was meant to be `array[i] = i.toJS` so that there's a value to refer to.

  exposed through [utility functions] in `dart:js_interop`.

Lastly, like any other extension type, you're allowed to declare any
[non-`external` members] in the interop type. `isMidnight` is one such example.

### Extension members on interop types

You can also write `external` members in [extensions] of interop types. For
example:

```dart
extension on Array {
  external int push(JSAny? any);
}
```

The semantics of calling `push` are identical to what it would have been if it

> was in the definition of `Array` instead. The only `external` members you can
> write in such an extension are instance members and the allowed operators. Like

Reviewer: It may not be clear what cannot be done. Consider:

```suggestion
was in the definition of `Array` instead. Extensions can have `external` instance members and operators, but cannot have `external` static members or constructors. Like
```

Reviewer 2: Done.

with interop types, you can write any non-`external` members in the extension.

> These extensions are useful for when an interop type doesn't expose the
> `external` member you need and you don't want to create a new interop type.

Reviewer: I wonder if we need to justify why this could happen (e.g. a library written by someone else). For example:

```suggestion
Just like extensions let you add members to classes you consume from other packages, extensions with `external` members let you do the same with interop types. This is often handy to expose an `external` member you need and was missing from an API, without creating a new interop type.
```

Reviewer 2: I think considering the previous sentences link to extensions and the motivation is already present, the extra context might be extraneous.
